Sometime after his enrollment into the Order, Skywalker was meditating with his master while also holding together many pebbles using the Force. However, when Master Tosan informed his master that he had a mission from the Council, Anakin's concentration broke due to the surprise of him leaving again. The mission was to go to the planet Dallenor so that he could collect an ancient Jedi holocron from a dig site. Obi-Wan told Anakin that he would be back shortly and that he would be training with Yoda in the meantime. Skywalker, displeased, complained that he would have to be in the class with "little kids" and that he was far ahead of them in his training. However, he complied and spent his time with the younglings, although he did not enjoy himself. However, after some encouragement from Yoda, Kenobi took Skywalker along with him on the mission in a T-6 shuttle.

Skywalker was glad that he was finally in space again and asked if he could pilot the shuttle. Kenobi told him that he could when they got closer to Dallenor. Skywalker asked what Obi-Wan's life was like before joining the Jedi Order. Kenobi told him that he did not remember as he was taken in at a very young age. Anakin, sadly, expressed that he was always a Jedi and nothing else. Kenobi tried to reassure him by telling him that he still needed to train and was a Padawan when they both met. However, Skywalker was unconvinced and stated that his life was already set out for him and that he was not anything else, unlike him who was a slave. He concluded that this must be why the Jedi Council said he was too old to be trained. Obi-Wan tried to reassure him again by saying that the Council was not perfect and that Qui-Gon Jinn chose him just like he chose Kenobi. Skywalker, angered, proclaimed that Kenobi's master was dead and that now he was stuck with him. Before Kenobi could reassure Anakin, he walked away.

Upon arriving on Dallenor, Kenobi and Skywalker encountered a female Togruta archaeologist named Clatriffe. She was glad that they arrived so they could take the holocron away due to the fact that it was causing problems. She explained that the local pirates wanted to get it and she had to hire local guards to keep them at bay. Kenobi ordered Skywalker to stay outside to keep watch whilst he and Clatriffe went inside the facility to obtain the holocron. After they went inside, Skywalker noticed that the pirates had arrived.

Kenobi, Skywalker, and Clatriffe went out to meet them and were introduced to the Krypder Riders and their leader Hudso Shaku, who knew that the holocron was something important due to offworlders wanting to get it. Kenobi stated that they had come in peace but were willing to defend themselves. He activated his lightsaber, whereupon Shaku ordered his pirates to attack him because he found the laser sword to be more valuable than the things that they dug up. Kenobi quickly disarmed the pirates but, while Skywalker froze up due to the suddenness of the attack, Shaku captured him by placing his sword under his chin. He ordered a trade, the boy for the lightsaber, but was taken down by Skywalker using the Force to assault Shaku with small pebbles. With Shaku knocked unconscious and the pirates' weapons destroyed, they surrendered to the Jedi.

On the shuttle home, Kenobi praised Skywalker for his great work on his first mission. Skywalker, however, exclaimed that he froze up and was not ready for a mission even though he believed otherwise. Kenobi reassured Skywalker that it was he who was not ready. He asked how he could save his Padawan if he could not save his master from dying. Skywalker, with renewed confidence, stated that they would save each other and that that was what Qui-Gon would have wanted. Kenobi agreed and then recalled that Anakin wanted to fly the shuttle. Skywalker, in response, said yes enthusiastically.
