At some point after the mission to Carnelion IV, Skywalker was being tested by Kenobi, who was having the Padawan attempt to defend from a group of Marksman-H training remotes using a wooden stick rather than his lightsaber, in the presence of Yoda, Windu, and Master Bant Eerin. When Skywalker used the Force to grab his master's lightsaber, completing the trial using it instead, he and Kenobi began to argue with one another, which made Yoda, Windu, and Eerin walk away. As Kenobi left with a team of Jedi Temple Guards, investigating a disturbance in the Force, he ordered Skywalker to remain there and clean up.


Disobeying Kenobi and riding down to the Temple storage level by using two training remotes to travel through the Temple's vents, Skywalker followed the Force to the training stores, where he was attacked by the cause of the disturbance: a team of battle droids. As the droids and Skywalker fought, the Padawan was forced to use the Force and electroblades he found in a nearby box, as Kenobi had taken his lightsaber after his training maneuver. However, Kenobi and the guard team quickly arrived, giving Skywalker back his lightsaber and joining the fight, only for Skywalker to leave upon having a Force vision about the Council chambers. Rushing to the counc chambers and past a seemingly-knocked out guard, Skywalker was held back as a masked enemy, disguised as a Temple Guard, appeared to kidnap Yoda himself, with Skywalker failing to catch up the escaping enemy on a jetpack. After being returned to the council chamber after the jetpack failed him, Skywalker reported what he had seen, with one temple guard finding the seemingly-unconscious guard to actually be a disguised battle droid.

When Skywalker spotted a non-Techno Union logo on the droid's head, Kenobi and him traveled to the Temple archives, where they learned it was the symbol of the Nova Crime Syndicate. Travelling to the syndicate's base-of-operations on the Wheel space station, albiet in disguise to not disrupt the unseasy truce the Jedi held with its Baron Administrator Jaspara, the two Jedi located whom they believed to Grynask Sanberge, the leader of the Nova syndicate. With their mind tricks appearing to work, the supposed criminal gave them new information that pointed them to the planet Glee Anselm, where they encountered several aquatic battle droids and found the fake Temple Guard's underwater base of operations. Upon finding Yoda trapped in the base within a thick seaweed and besting the fake Temple Guard, Kenobi allowed Skywalker to unmask their foe as thanks for noticing the Nova sybmol on the battle droid back at the Temple.

Upon unmasking the enemy, however, Skywalker and Kenobi were shocked to see it was Eerin. Their confusion was only increased when Sanberge appeared, only to reveal himself to be a Force-sensitive and then remove his mask, showing himself to actually be Windu in disguise. When Skywalker realized the entire adventure had been a test, Yoda easily freed himself from the seaweed and confirmed Skywalker's theory, revealing it was a test for Skywalker and Kenobi both. Having seen how well they could work together instead of arguing, Skywalker and Kenobi began to view each other as brothers. To leave the world, the two lifted their shuttle off the seabed together.
