Rescue at Staggec
Following the engagement on Geonosis, Skywalker built a new lightsaber to replace the one he lost. Early in the war, Skywalker quickly came to have encounters with Dooku's personal agents. When Senators Amidala and Yarua were ambushed by General Grievous on the Moon of Staggec, Kenobi volunteered himself and Skywalker for the mission. Shortly after they arrived on the moon, Skywalker followed a trail of footprints into a nearby forest. There, he and Kenobi discovered Yarua's daughter, Viiveenn, who gave Skywalker a flower and led the Jedi to the ship where her father had been taken. When Viiveenn headed for the ship, Kenobi ran after her, causing him to be captured by the surrounding battle droids. Skywalker attacked the battle droids and tried to stop Kenobi and Viiveenn from being captured, but was too late. As the ship left, Skywalker lamented not leaving any droids intact for interrogation. Calming his mind, he meditated to think of a solution. Skywalker then used the Republic shuttle they'd arrived in to sneak onto the Providence-class Dreadnought Grievous was commanding. Alongside Kenobi, Skywalker cut down the remaining droids and ran off to find Amidala while Kenobi went to confront Grievous. By the time he reached her however, he found that the senator had already rescued herself and her associates. Skywalker then returned with the group to the Republic shuttle. Kenobi arrived shortly after with Viiveenn, informing the group that Yarua had died saving his daughter. After leaving the ship and escaping into hyperspace, Kenobi reported to Yoda while Skywalker checked on Amidala, who comforted Viiveenn over her loss.

Serving as a Jedi Commander
Later, Skywalker served with his Jedi Master as a Jedi Commander, participating in battles on a rocky planet alongside Kenobi's 7th Sky Corps and Clone Marshal Commander CC-2224. In the aftermath of clash, Skywalker encountered the clone trooper known as "Sister," who was arranging the helmets of her fallen brothers beneath a tree as a memorial.

Skywalker spoke with Sister, and she explained that she was saddened by her brothers' deaths, as well as the origins of her name and the camaraderie her clone brothers had shown for her and her gender identity. Skywalker shared that the Jedi supported such identity and the belief of rising above things, such as Sister's transcendence of the concepts of gender. Sister agreed, and both moved to rendezvous with Kenobi at his location.

Business on Cato Neimoidia

A short time later, Skywalker was promoted to the rank of Jedi Knight. This was initially done informally as a result of the increased need for Jedi in the battlefield, but was soon legitimized by a knighting ceremony. Though the Jedi were not yet formally integrated within the Grand Army of the Republic, this appointment to Knighthood made Skywalker an acting Jedi General. Skywalker spent the night after his Knighting ceremony with Amidala in which he presented her with a Padawan braid pendant he had made for her after his Padawan braid was cut. Shortly after his knighting ceremony, the Purse World of Cato Neimoidia, the headquarters of the Trade Federation, was rocked by a destructive explosion that was blamed on the Republic. Kenobi, now a Jedi Master and an acting Council member, was selected to travel to Cato Neimoidia to investigate the explosion. Wanting to clear any Separatist involvement, Dooku sent his own agent to Cato Neimoidia as well, which was later revealed to be Asajj Ventress. Skywalker expressed his desire to accompany Kenobi on this mission but was instead assigned to instruct a group of younglings, passing on what he had learned as a Padawan, much to his dismay. Before Kenobi left for Cato Neimoidia, Skywalker gave him a RazBohan high-encryption comlink so they could remain in contact. He later accompanied the younglings on an aid mission to Langston in which he was given command of the 302nd Battalion, with Clone Commander Theo serving as his second-in command.

While en route to Langston, Skywalker became acquainted with the youngling Mill Alibeth, a Zabrak girl who was experiencing naseua as a result of a unique connection to the Force. Empathizing with her struggles as a mirror to his own, Skywalker chose to guide and instruct Alibeth as she grew to accept the Force and her connection to it. Kenobi eventually contacted Skywalker, asking him to analyze data he found that incriminated the Republic in the bombing. When he lost contact with Kenobi, Skywalker disobeyed orders to rescue his former master with Alibeth by his side. Shortly after arriving on Cato Neimoidia, Skywalker and Alibeth found a series of bombs planted in important Neimoidian landmarks which they later discovered were planted by Ketar Nor to send a message to the Republic. They came to find that Kenobi was on trial for conspiracy against Cato Neimoidia after Ventress found the data that incriminated the Republic. Skywalker rescued Kenobi moments before rifles from Neimoidian guards fired on him. With the help of Ruug Quarnom and Amidala, the Republic was cleared of any involvement in the bombing. Instead, revealing that an outside actor orchestrated the bombing to point to the Republic and Separatists in order to play on the fear of both sides of the new war.

When they returned to Coruscant, Palpatine passed the Jedi Military Integration Act, officially making the Jedi a part of the Grand Army of the Republic and marking the beginnings of General Skywalker and General Kenobi. Alibeth, now apprenticed to Rig Nema providing special medical and spiritual assistance, bid farewell to Skywalker and Kenobi, thanking the former for his guidance. This mission was one of several Skywalker counted as the times he saved Kenobi's life, but Kenobi, however, insisted that "the business on Cato Neimoidia does not count". Skywalker also believed the operation was the first time he encountered Ventress, but he recognized her Ginivex-class fanblade starfighter and she already knew his name.
